Blog: What startups recruiters actually see (#7586)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/founders/what-recruiters-see.md

Remember, actual professional recruiters don't just spend their time reviewing applications - they are conducting and scheduling interviews, collating feedback, negotiating offers, onboarding new hires, creating headcount plans, putting up job ads, etc. While it may seem extremely harsh that your application only gets a quick review, bear in mind that we're trying to figure out whether to invest dozens of people hours putting you through the full hiring process. 

By sharing a bit of insight into how the _application_ bit of the hiring process actually works at a startup like PostHog, hopefully I can help increase your chances of landing a first round interview at least! Beyond that, no promises...

## But first, some context

I'm talking about startups with a reasonable degree of brand recognition (ie. not a startup founded last week). In PostHog's case, we are:

- 42 people, $27m raised
- Team is 70% engineers
- 1 in-house recruiter, no agencies

> 

Reviewer: it'd be fun / interesting to put the total applications we've ever received, if we have it

Reviewer: i feel like it's worth making the point that we get a _ton_ of very automated applications (and why this happens and how it forces us to look so quickly at people's resumes)

Author: added a little more data here (I only have the last 12-ish months really as we switched from Workable to Ashby, but the number of applications per role is more impressive anyway as we don't hire that many people)

Let’s get into it. 

> ## So happens to my application after I hit send?

Reviewer 2: Missing a what here

If you're applying for a job at a startup, chances are they are using an applicant tracking system (ATS) like Ashby, Greenhouse, Lever, or Workable. We use Ashby, but the process a recruiter follows generally doesn't vary massively between these systems. This is what a typical application looks like:

![Ashby screenshot](../images/ashby-screenshot.png)

## How do I maximize my chances of getting through?

This stuff is subjective, but generally these are the things that can increase the chances of a good application making it through:

> - Write a short and actually personalized proper cover note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Write a short and _obviously_ personalized proper cover note
```

  - A few sentences about why you are interested in this role specifically is fine
  - You don't need 5 paragraphs that are just your resumé slightly reworded - it's just more text we will skim over
  - Our ATS will wreck your formatting beyond line breaks

>   - Don't introduce yourself (we know who you are)

Reviewer: i don't quite get what you mean by this - you suggest nothing in a cover letter should be about the canddiate beyond their motivation right? can we clarify

Author: clarified

>   - Match the tone of the company - for example, we are informal so please no 'Dear Sir/Madam'

Reviewer: not sure this is exactly right, but an extra point around tailoring and being clear it's not mass spam being sent to us
```suggestion
  - Match the tone of the company - for example, we are informal so please no 'Dear Sir/Madam'
  - If you can figure out what the company cares about, or who is in it - talk about how you think you could help them achieve their goals and why
```

  - I'd go so far as to say that exporting your LinkedIn profile as a PDF is totally fine, but...
- Keep your LinkedIn up to date - it makes us suspicious when there are big discrepancies between the two
- Don't have your CV end in 2021 or whenever, we don't have time to contact you to query it - we don't care if you had a career break, just put that
- Emailing the recruiter/hiring manager directly causes more stress because we then have to add you to our ATS - please apply directly, we are dying here

## I did all this and it didn't work - where's my feedback, you assholes?

When you apply for a job at a startup and don't get past the first stage, you'll either get nothing back (booo) or an automated email saying you have been unsuccessful. Applicants who felt they were a great fit might, quite reasonably, ask for feedback as to why they weren't successful. 

We find ~5% of candidates ask for feedback - if we replied to each one and spent ~5min writing each email, we'd be spending 30-60min on a typical day sending people feedback. This is why we tell people to only expect feedback after any interview stage. I expect this picture is similar for most startups.

> 

Reviewer: I often feel bad for those that look well qualified but we don't hire. Maybe explain why this can happen? The point being, don't feel like it's necessarily a reflection of you - it's a reflection of your relative competition... you may have been competing against someone that has worked with us for 5 years before

Author: Agree, added something on that now

## Recruiters love this - one weird hack to bypass all of this

> Get a proper, warm referral. Annoying, right? But it works. Of the 12 people who got an interview for our recent marketing role, 4 were enthusiastic referrals from an existing member of the PostHog team. We trust our existing team's judgement incredibly highly - they already met the bar to join our team _and_ they help us pre-filter applicants. 

Reviewer: i'd clarify that this doesn't mean:

* randomly hassle X who works at PostHog for an intro to Y

what it does mean:

* work hard wherever you are - you probably underestimate the importance of leaving a good impression on everyone around you

Author: rephrased

---
date: 2024-01-23
title: What startup recruiters actually see when you apply for a job
author:
  - charles-cook
featuredImage: ../images/blog/transparency.jpeg
featuredImageType: full
tags:
  - Founders
  - Culture
  - People  
---

> Last week we opened a new marketing role at PostHog, and we got 300 applicants in the first 2 days. This was high, but not unusual for a startup - my record is 900 in a day, but I bet folks working at giant companies like Google see way way more. Of these 300, 12 got an interview. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Last week we opened a new marketing role at PostHog, and we got 300 applicants in the first 2 days. This was high, but not unusual for a startup – my record is 900 in a day, but I bet folks working at giant companies like Google see way way more. Of these 300, 12 got an interview. 
```

As I sifted through these, I realized a very obvious thing - there is a _much_ bigger gap between what applicants and recruiter experience than either group realizes:

> - What applicants and recruiters see on their screens are _completely_ different. This leads to some needlessly funky looking applications - luckily this is easy to solve. 
> - You may spend 30min+ researching a company, crafting a cover letter and applying. At these numbers, I was able to spend **less than 1min** reviewing each application.  And this is just an average - some applications took me 5s(!) to realize they were a no, so I could spend 5min+ reading good ones carefully.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- What applicants and recruiters see on their screens are _completely_ different. This leads to some needlessly funky looking applications – luckily this is easy to solve. 

- You may spend 30min+ researching a company, crafting a cover letter and applying. At these numbers, I was able to spend **less than 1min** reviewing each application. And this is just an average – some applications took me 5s(!) to realize they were a no, so I could spend 5min+ reading good ones carefully.
```

> Remember, actual professional recruiters don't just spend their time reviewing applications - they are conducting and scheduling interviews, collating feedback, negotiating offers, onboarding new hires, creating headcount plans, putting up job ads, etc. While it may seem extremely harsh that your application only gets a quick review, bear in mind that we're trying to figure out whether to invest dozens of people hours putting you through the full hiring process. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Remember, professional recruiters don't just spend their time reviewing applications, they're also: conducting and scheduling interviews, collating feedback, negotiating offers, onboarding new hires, creating headcount plans, putting up job ads, etc.

So, while it may seem extremely harsh that your application only gets a quick review, bear in mind we're trying to figure out whether to invest dozens of people hours putting you through the full hiring process. 
```

By sharing a bit of insight into how the _application_ bit of the hiring process actually works at a startup like PostHog, hopefully I can help increase your chances of landing a first round interview at least! Beyond that, no promises...

## But first, some context

> I'm talking about startups with a reasonable degree of brand recognition (ie. not a startup founded last week). In PostHog's case, we are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I'm talking about startups with a reasonable degree of brand recognition – i.e. not a startup founded last week). In PostHog's case, we are:
```

- 42 people, $27m raised
- Team is 70% engineers
- 1 in-house recruiter, no agencies

> In the last 12 months, we received over 9000 applications, or an average of **460 applicants per role**. So that's a lot of applications to sift through! Many of which are automated/no-effort one click applications - hence the need to be able to say no quickly. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the last 12 months, we received over 9,000 applications, or an average of **460 applicants per role**. That's a lot of applications to sift through, many of which are automated/no-effort one click applications.
```

Let’s get into it. 

## So what happens to my application after I hit send?

If you're applying for a job at a startup, chances are they are using an applicant tracking system (ATS) like Ashby, Greenhouse, Lever, or Workable. We use Ashby, but the process a recruiter follows generally doesn't vary massively between these systems. This is what a typical application looks like:

![Ashby screenshot](../images/ashby-screenshot.png)

## How do I maximize my chances of getting through?

This stuff is subjective, but generally these are the things that can increase the chances of a good application making it through:

> - Write a short and _obviously_ personalized proper cover note
>   - A few sentences about why you are interested in this role specifically is fine
>   - You don't need 5 paragraphs that are just your resumé slightly reworded - it's just more text we will skim over
>   - Our ATS will wreck your formatting beyond line breaks
>   - Writing 'hi I'm X' is a waste of words (we know who you are!)
>   - Match the tone of the company - for example, we are informal so please no 'Dear Sir/Madam'
>   - If you can figure out what the company cares about, or who is in it - talk about how you think you could help them achieve their goals and why
>   - Write _something_ - if it's too much hassle, that's ok, you're probably not that interested!
>   - No ChatGPT - they're really obvious
> - No profile pictures - this isn't social media, and you're wasting the space
> - Stick to boring formatted CVs - prioritize clarity over design
>   - I'd go so far as to say that exporting your LinkedIn profile as a PDF is totally fine, but...
> - Keep your LinkedIn up to date - it makes us suspicious when there are big discrepancies between the two
> - Don't have your CV end in 2021 or whenever, we don't have time to contact you to query it - we don't care if you had a career break, just put that
> - Emailing the recruiter/hiring manager directly causes more stress because we then have to add you to our ATS - please apply directly, we are dying here

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Write a short and _obviously_ personalized cover note

- A few sentences about why you are interested in this role specifically is fine.
- You don't need 5 paragraphs that are just your resumé slightly reworded – it's just more text we will skim over.
- Our ATS will wreck your formatting beyond line breaks, so keep it simple.
- Writing 'hi I'm X' is a waste of words (we know who you are!)
- Match the tone of the company – e.g. we are informal, so please no 'Dear Sir/Madam'.
- If you can figure out what the company cares about, or who is in it, talk about how you think you could help them achieve their goals and why.
- Write _something_ – if it's too much hassle, that's ok, you're probably not that interested!
- No ChatGPT, it's they're really obvious.

### Keep your CV simple and up-to-date

- No profile pictures. This isn't social media, and you're wasting the space
- Stick to boring formatted CVs – prioritize clarity over design. I'd go so far as to say that exporting your LinkedIn profile as a PDF is totally fine, but...
- Keep your LinkedIn up to date – it makes us suspicious when there are big discrepancies between the two.
- Don't have your CV end in 2021 or whenever, we don't have time to contact you to query it. We don't care if you had a career break, just put that.
- Emailing the recruiter/hiring manager directly causes more stress because we then have to add you to our ATS – please apply directly, we are dying here.
```

Reviewer 3: Can we add something about not asking to connect on LinkedIn? ;)

> ## I did all this and it didn't work - where's my feedback, you assholes?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## I did all this and it didn't work – where's my feedback, you assholes?
```

> When you apply for a job at a startup and don't get past the first stage, you'll either get nothing back (booo) or an automated email saying you have been unsuccessful. Applicants who felt they were a great fit might, quite reasonably, ask for feedback as to why they weren't successful. And we say no to a lot of candidates who actually meet the spec on paper - this doesn't mean you are a bad candidate, it just means that _relatively speaking_ you were not as strong as other candidates who applied this time. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you apply for a job at a startup and don't get past the first stage, you'll either get nothing back (booo) or an automated email saying you have been unsuccessful. Applicants who felt they were a great fit might, quite reasonably, ask for feedback as to why they weren't successful. 

But, here's the thing... we say no to a lot of candidates who actually meet the spec on paper. This doesn't mean you are a bad candidate, it just means that _relatively speaking_ you were not as strong as other candidates who applied this time. 
```

Should we add something about timing here? Sometimes it's because you applied at a point where we have a lot of good candidates later in the process etc.

> We find ~5% of candidates ask for feedback - if we replied to each one and spent ~5min writing each email, we'd be spending 30-60min on a typical day sending people feedback. This is why we tell people to only expect feedback after any interview stage. I expect this picture is similar for most startups.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We find ~5% of candidates ask for feedback. If we replied to each one and spent ~5min writing each email, we'd be spending 30-60min on a typical day sending people feedback. This is why we tell people to only expect feedback after any interview stage. I expect this picture is similar for most startups.
```

> ## Recruiters love this - one weird hack to bypass all of this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Recruiters love this one, weird hack to bypass all of this
```

> Get a proper, warm referral. Annoying, right? But it works. Of the 12 people who got an interview for our recent marketing role, 4 were enthusiastic referrals from an existing member of the PostHog team. We trust our existing team's judgement incredibly highly - they already met the bar to join our team _and_ they help us pre-filter applicants. 
> 
> This doesn't mean "randomly hassle X who works at PostHog for an intro to Y" - work hard wherever you are to leave a good impression on everyone you talk to at the company. We do talk to each other!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Get a proper, warm referral. Annoying, right? But it works. 

Of the 12 people who got an interview for our recent marketing role, four were enthusiastic referrals from an existing member of the PostHog team. We trust our existing team's judgement. They already met the bar to join our team _and_ they help us pre-filter applicants. 

This doesn't mean "randomly hassle X who works at PostHog for an intro to Y" – work hard wherever you are to leave a good impression on everyone you talk to at the company. We do talk to each other!
```
